https://www.economist.com/united-states/2023/06/03/republicans-intensify-their-assault-on-city-governments

Republicans intensify their assault on city governments
A new phase in the American tussle between state and local powers
The skyline of Jacksonville, Florida
No, you can’t do that image: dreamstime
Jun 3rd 2023 | WASHINGTON, DC

Conservative dogma once taught that local government reigned
supreme. Those closest to constituents were best equipped to govern
them, the argument went. Today, however, Republicans espouse a
Goldilocks principle of government, says Bennett Sandlin, the head of
the Texas Municipal League, an advocacy group. “The federal government
is big and bad, cities are small and bad, and somehow state government
gets it just right.”

Listen to this story. Enjoy more audio and podcasts on iOS or Android.
In the latest legislative session Republican statehouses have sought
to bolster state power and undercut the role of cities in local
politics. Two sweeping new bills that illustrate this shift await
governors’ signatures in Texas and Florida. The Texas Regulatory
Consistency Act bars municipal governments from enacting policy that
goes beyond state law in eight areas: agriculture, business and
commerce, finance, insurance, labour, natural resources, occupations
and property. Any local laws that currently do, such as tenant and
worker protections, will be voided.

Florida’s new legislation will also chill city lawmaking. Local
Ordinances—as the bill is, misleadingly, called—authorises businesses
to sue municipal governments over any law they deem “arbitrary or
unreasonable”. While a speedy “rocket-docket” court deliberates the
case, in most circumstances the government will have to suspend the
rule in question. And if the challenger wins, the city must repeal
it. Last year Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor, vetoed a previous
version of the bill, arguing that it would lead to an onslaught of
costly litigation. But legislators and business lobbyists think they
have a better shot of securing his signature this time, as Mr DeSantis
cultivates his conservative credentials in his push for the
presidency.

Such gutting of local authority—called “super-pre-emption” by
academics and “death-star pre-emption” by progressives—is new. But for
decades state politicians of all stripes have chipped away at specific
local ordinances to retain consistency across jurisdictions. A dozen
or so years ago the nature of pre-emption started to change, as
Republicans weaponised these powers to kill progressive initiatives in
big cities, says Richard Briffault of Columbia Law School. Plastic-bag
bans, gun controls, paid sick-leave mandates and minimum-wage rises
were axed.

More recently pre-emption bills have started to proliferate, many
targeting lgbtq folk, progressive prosecutors and
abortion-seekers. According to non-profit groups, there were 140 in
2017. That number grew to 475 in 2021 and over 1,000 in 2022. Midway
through this year’s legislative season the tally was already 650.

The assault is driven in part by changing demography in the South. In
recent years Democratic cities in Republican states have been flooded
by new residents. Texas and Florida stand out. In the year to July
2022 seven of America’s ten fastest-growing big cities were in these
two states. That feeds a nasty political tension.

State Republicans in both Texas and Florida emerged mightier from last
year’s midterm elections. But many metropolitan areas leaned further
left. Last month a Democrat clinched an upset win to become mayor of
Jacksonville, Florida’s largest city. Republican state politicians see
liberal cities as a threat. Urban hubs generate large shares of state
gdp, and economic power tends to beget political influence.

In some states, rather than merely blunting local authority, lawmakers
are stepping in directly. In April Tate Reeves, Mississippi’s
Republican governor, signed two bills that, respectively, increase the
number of state cops patrolling the streets of Jackson, the state
capital, and create a new state-run court district in the city. The
naacp, a civil-rights group, sued, alleging that the laws violate the
14th Amendment by imposing a “separate and unequal” justice system on
the city’s mostly black residents. “They are looking to colonise
Jackson,” the mayor told the Associated Press.

Legislators in Georgia, meanwhile, have passed a law authorising a
state commission to remove locally elected district attorneys from
their posts. (Some suspect this will allow the state to punish Fani
Willis, Fulton County’s chief prosecutor, for going after Donald
Trump.) And on the national stage, in March Congress struck down a
bill passed by the council of Washington, dc, for the first time in
three decades. Andrew Clyde, a Republican from Georgia who proposed
the scrapping, wants to dissolve the dc mayor’s office.

Some new laws could get tied up in court if critics claim they breach
state constitutions. But, says Courtnee Melton-Fant of the University
of Memphis, since local governments were granted no powers by the
founding fathers, states are well within their rights to designate
authority as they see fit. With super-pre-emption laws on the books,
many cities and towns will struggle to function as laboratories of
democracy. They risk becoming forums of frustration instead. ■

Stay on top of American politics with Checks and Balance, our weekly
subscriber-only newsletter, which examines the state of American
democracy and the issues that matter to voters.

This article appeared in the United States section of the print
edition under the headline "Pre-emptive strikes"

